Our cardiovascular system weakens and is more prone to arrhythmia as we age. An arrhythmia is an abnormal heartbeat rhythm which can be life-threatening. Atrial fibrillation , atrial flutter , and ventricular fibrillation are the recurring life-threatening arrhythmias that affect the elderly population. An electrocardiogram is the principal diagnostic tool employed to record and interpret ECG signals. These signals contain information about the different types of arrhythmias. However, due to the complexity and non-linearity of ECG signals, it is difficult to manually analyze these signals. Moreover, the interpretation of ECG signals is subjective and might vary between the experts. Hence, computer-aided diagnosis system is proposed. CAD system will ensure that the assessment of ECG signals is objective and accurate. In this work, we present convolutional neural network technique to automatically detect the different ECG segments. Our algorithm consists of an eleven-layer deep CNN with the output layer of four neurons, each representing the normal , A-Fib, AFL, and V-Fib ECG class. In this work, we have used ECG signals of two seconds and five seconds’ durations without QRS detection. We achieved an accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of and respectively for two seconds of ECG segments. We obtained an accuracy of   sensitivity of and specificity of for five seconds of ECG duration. This proposed algorithm can serve as an adjunct tool to assist clinicians in confirming their diagnosis.   Keywords – Arrhythmia, atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, convolution neural network, deep learning, electrocardiogram signals, ventricular fibrillation.   . Introduction   According to the report the United Nations in the world is facing an aging population . It is estimated that the number of people aged years and above will grow from million to billion . Furthermore, the growing population is expected to be double rising to nearly billion . The increase in elderly population poses economic and health care issues to the world. Our cardiovascular system grows weaker and becomes more receptive to diseases as we grow older . Moreover, the arteries stiffens and muscle wall of the left ventricle thickens with aging, resulting in decrease in the compliance of blood vessels of the arteries . Consequently, it affects the overall function of the heart which leads to arrhythmia. Hence, arrhythmia is one of the health conditions that the elderly subjects encounter in the society . Arrhythmia is defined as the abnormal rhythm of the heartbeat which can be harmless or critical. The atrial fibrillation , atrial flutter , and ventricular fibrillation are the recurrent types of arrhythmias reported in the elderly . The A-Fib is commonly occurring arrhythmia caused due to various health complications. During A-Fib, the contraction of the atria is asynchronous due to the fast firing of electrical impulses from several parts of cardiac re-entry . Re-entry occurs when an impulse fails to die out after normal activation of the heart and continues to re-excite the heart. In fact, the electrocardiogram rhythm of A-Fib is fast and beating at rate of to beats in minute. It has an abnormal R-R interval, irregular and fast ventricular contraction, and wave is absent in the ECG signal . In AFL, the atrial contracts rapidly between and beats per minute and have replicating saw-tooth waveform, known as flutter wave. AFL occurs when the atria undergoes chaotic electrical signals . V-Fib is usually caused rapid heartbeat known as ventricular tachycardia . This abnormal heartbeat is due to abnormal electrical impulses in the ventricles. During this, ventricles contract chaotically and haphazardly. It can be seen in  the ECG which records an unrefined and erratic fluctuation of ECG signal with the absence of QRS complex wave . Typical plots of NSR, A-Fib, AFL, and V-Fib ECG signals are shown in Figure and Figure . Therefore, the of ECG signals contains vital details about the conditions of the heart. Thus, the ECG signal is beneficial in the detection and diagnosis of cardiac health . However, ECG signals are highly nonlinear and any changes in the ECG signals is difficult to observe as its amplitude is in millivolts . Further, the indications of cardiac abnormalities are faithfully indicated in the ECG signals during Holter recording. Thus, manual interpretation of the ECG signals can be time-consuming, taxing and subjective due to the long recordings. Moreover, there is great possibility that important information captured in the ECG may be overlooked. Hence, computer-aided diagnosis system can be employed to reduce subjective variabilities in the diagnosis and reduce the time taken to analyze the ECG signals . Table shows the studies conducted on CAD system to automatically detect arrhythmias and categorize different types of arrhythmia into their respective classes. Wang et al. performed short-time multifractal characterization on three classes of ECG beats and recorded an accuracy of for A-Fib, for V-Fib and for VT using fuzzy Kohonen network classifier. Martis et al. have conducted three-class study to automatically diagnose A-Fib, AFL, and NSR ECG signals. In , they have employed higher order spectra methods on NSR, A-Fib, and AFL ECG beats. Then these ECG beats are subjected to independent component analysis to select highly significant features. Their method yielded an accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of and with the k-nearest neighbor classifier. In their another study , they performed discrete cosine transform combined with ICA on the ECG beats. Their proposed technique attained an average accuracy of . In addition, Fahim et al. employed data mining approach with expectation-maximizationbased clustering on compressed ECG signals obtained from an open-source database. They used correlation-based feature subset selection technique to reduce the number of features. Then, the selected features are fed into the classifier. They detected A-Fib, premature ventricular contraction, and V-Fib with an average accuracy of using the rule-based system. Acharya et al. proposed CAD system to automatically detect and identify same four ECG classes using the entire database obtained from an opensource database . They extracted entropy features from the ECG signals. These extracted  features were subjected to feature reduction and the selected significant features were fed into the decision tree classifier, yielding an accuracy of sensitivity of and specificity of . Further, Desai et al. also implemented CAD system to diagnose the four-class arrhythmia . However, they used smaller dataset obtained from the same open-source database in their work. They applied the recurrence quantification analysis parameters to the ECG beats. Then, the features are arranged according to the F-value index. They achieved an accuracy of with the rotation forest classifier. However, from the literature , it can be noted that these CAD systems have standardized workflow whereby the signals are pre-processed first, then segmented. Then the signals are subjected to features extraction, followed feature selection to select only significant features for classification. In this study, we did not follow the conventional process of an automated CAD system. This is unlike the previous works recorded in Table as no features extraction or selection is implemented in this work. We employed an eleven-layer convolutional neural network to automatically classify the four classes of ECG signals . Hence, in this study, there is no need to experiment with different features extraction techniques or determine which classifier performs the best with the extracted features. CNN has recently been employed in the automated classification of ECG signals. Kiranyaz et al. studied the patient-specific ECG categorization and monitoring system using three-layer CNN with only R-peak wave. They attained an accuracy of and in the detection of supraventricular ectopic beats and ventricular ectopic beats respectively. Zubair et al. used CNN with recordings of ECG signals obtained from MIT-BIH database. They extracted R-peak ECG beat patterns for the training of the three-layer CNN. They achieved accuracy in detecting the ECG beats into their respective classes . These works detected QRS wave in their automated classification. Nevertheless, in our study, no detection of QRS wave is implemented.   . Data Used   In this work, the ECG signals were obtained from publicly available arrhythmia database. We have obtained V-Fib ECG signals from Creighton University ventricular  tachyarrhythmia, A-Fib and AFL ECG signals from MIT-BIH atrial fibrillation, and A-Fib , AFL , and NSR ECG signals from MIT-BIH arrhythmia database . In this work, we have used lead II ECG signals. The details of the ECG signals used in this study is shown in Table . We have used two different durations of ECG segments in this work. The total number of ECG segments used for net and net is and respectively. Pre-processing   The ECG signals from MIT-BIH atrial fibrillation and Creighton University ventricular tachyarrhythmia are sampled at frequency of Hz whereas the ECG signals acquired from  MIT-BIH arrhythmia are sampled at frequency of Hz. Hence, the ECG signals from MITBIH arrhythmia database are downsampled from to Hz. Then, all the ECG signals are denoised and the baseline is removed with Daubechies wavelet . Further, the ECG signals are segmented and sorted according to the cardiac conditions with the prescribed annotations retrieved from the public database. In this study, we segmented the ECG signals of four classes into net and net without any wave detection. Each segment is normalized with Z-score normalization to address the problem of amplitude scaling and to the offset effect before we feed the ECG segments into the deep learning CNN for training and testing. An illustration of two seconds and five seconds ECG segments used in this work are shown in Figure and Figure respectively. Convolutional Neural Network Convolutional neural network is first introduced Fukushima in and later improved. It is form of deep learning where the structure is made up of many hidden layers and parameters . Further, the CNN can self-learn and self-organize which does not require supervision . CNN has been applied in diverse applications such as object recognition , image classification , and handwriting classification . It is also employed in the medical field as an automated diagnostic tool to aid clinicians .  It is noted that CNN the need for pre-processing and separate feature extraction technique . Therefore, it can help to reduce the burden during training and selecting the best feature extraction technique for the automated detection of arrhythmias. Also, there is possibility of attaining better performance if we can achieve fitting learning based on the trained hidden layers learning the structure of the data. Thus, we used CNN in this study for these reasons.   The Architecture   The primary operations involved in CNN are convolution, non-linearity, pooling, and classification . Two architectures of CNN are proposed in this work. Figure illustrates the working architecture of net with input samples. The architecture for net is illustrated in Figure with input samples. Stride refers to the number of samples the filter matrix slides over the input matrix. Therefore, in this work, we have used and strides . When the stride is the filter is moved from one sample to another at time and when the stride is the filter moves samples at time. bigger stride will result in smaller feature maps and vice versa. For both net and net the input layer is convolved with kernel size of to produce layer . max-pooling of size is applied onto every feature map . Then, the feature maps from layer are convolved with kernel size of and respectively to obtain layer . max-pooling of size is again applied to every feature map . The feature maps from layer are then convolved with kernel size of and to produce layer in net and net respectively. max-pooling of size is applied onto every feature map . Then, the feature maps from layer are once again, convolved with kernel size of and to obtain layer for both net and net accordingly. max-pooling of size is again applied to every feature map . Finally, the neurons of every feature maps in layer are fully connected to neurons in layer which is also fully connected to and outputs in layers and respectively. The leaky rectifier linear unit is used as an activation function for layer and . We have used the softmax function for the last layer and Xavier initialization for the weights of layers. Training   Standard backpropagation with batch size of is implemented for stochastic learning. The weights are updated according to equation . where l, , ts, and denotes the weight, layer number, learning rate, regularization parameter, total number of training samples, batch size, and cost function respectively. In addition, the biases are updated through equation .  In this work, we have used learning rate, regularization, and momentum parameters. The parameters are set at and respectively.   Testing   After every round of training epoch is completed, our algorithm performs test on the CNN model. We used of the training set for validation of the algorithm after every epoch. total of twenty epochs of training and testing iterations was run. An illustration of the distribution of ECG segments used for training and testing procedures can be seen in Figure . k-fold Cross-validation   We have used ten-fold cross-validation in this work. Therefore, the total ECG segments for net and net are divided into ten equal portions. Nine out of ten portions are used for training and the rest of the ECG segments are used for testing. This procedure is repeated ten times shifting the testing data portion. In each fold, the performance is evaluated. The average of all ten-folds gives the total performance of the system.   . Result   We have trained our algorithm on workstation with two Intel Xeon GHz processor and RAM. It took an average of seconds to complete an epoch of training for net and seconds for net B. Table and Table show the confusion matrix for two-second and five-second segment respectively. It can be seen from Table that; ECG segments are correctly classified as NSR class. of ECG segments are correctly classified as A-Fib. total of AFL ECG segments is wrongly classified as NSR, A-Fib, and V-Fib. Furthermore, more than third of VFib is wrongly classified as A-Fib.  Also in Table of NSR ECG segments are wrongly classified as A-Fib and AFL. AFib segments are incorrectly classified as NSR, AFL, and V-Fib ECG segments. Out of AFL ECG segments, are accurately classified as AFL. Again, more than third of the V-Fib segments are wrongly classified as A-Fib. The overall classification results for net and net is tabulated in Table . An accuracy of and sensitivity and specificity of and respectively is achieved using net A. Also, an average accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of and respectively are obtained for net B. Discussion   The number of V-Fib segments used in this work is too few and hence resulted in low sensitivity rate. In this work, net performed slightly better than net as there are additional three seconds of additional information on ECG However, the results of two time durations are comparable. Also, CNN is invariant to translation. Therefore, in this work, the ECG segments are not affected time shifting and scaling thus there is no need to perform QRS detection in the pre-processing stage. Normally, the primary steps involved in analyzing ECG signals are filtering of noise, detection of QRS complex, extraction of R-peak, and formulation of feature set . Nonetheless, we did not implement step and in this work. Most of the works reported in Table have detected QRS wave in their study. Our results for net and net are comparable to the previous works reported which proves that the detection of QRS wave is not necessary for the classification of arrhythmia. In addition, the sensitivity rate achieved for net and net is comparable to those studies summarized in Table . Our group obtained sensitivity of using total of ECG beats . In this present work, we obtained sensitivity of and for two and five seconds’ durations with total of and ECG segments for net and net respectively. Additionally, in contrast to the authors in Table we analyzed the ECG signals in short-term duration instead of analyzing one beat of ECG signal. Normally, doctors analyze short-duration of ECG signals, not just an ECG beat for diagnosis. Therefore, it is more realistic to feed two and five seconds of ECG signals to the CNN structure for the automated detection of arrhythmias. Hence, in this study, we segmented our ECG signals into two-second and five-second ECG segments. It is evident that our proposed algorithm is more robust as compared to the rest of the works mentioned in Table . Overall, our proposed system does not require any QRS detection. Also in this work, the feature extraction and selection and classification are merged into one single model. Furthermore, we have validated the performance of our deep learning model in this work using net and net ECG segments. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to implement an eleven-layer CNN for the automated detection system of A-Fib, AFL, NSR, and V-Fib ECG signals without the detection of QRS complex. The main highlights of our proposed algorithm are as follows . CNN is invariant to translation, therefore, no pre-processing of QRS detection is needed in this work. ii. No QRS detection is required in this work.  iii. Feature extraction, feature selection, and classification steps are merged in the CNN algorithm. iv. Ten-fold cross-validation is used for the evaluation of CNN performance in this work. Hence, the reported performance is robust. The drawbacks of our proposed algorithm are as follows . Requires lot of data for training. ii. Takes more time to train the data.   . Conclusion   Generally, the presence of arrhythmia is reflected in the ECG Essentially, with many elderly affected serious arrhythmias, there is need to design an efficient and robust CAD system to accurately and automatically detect various types of arrhythmias. In this work, we have developed CNN to automatically classify the four classes using ECG segments of net and ECG segments of net B. Our proposed algorithm achieved an accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of and respectively for net A. Also, we obtained an average accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of and respectively for net B. Hence, it is evident that our developed system has potential to be implemented in clinical settings. Our proposed toolkit can serve as an adjunct tool to assist the clinicians to cross-check their findings. Moreover, clinicians can recommend appropriate treatments promptly and avoid further deterioration of cardiac condition. Further, the robustness of the proposed system can be further improved using large arrhythmia database with more number of V-Fib, A-Fib, AFL, and NSR ECG segments. In future, we intend to use huge database and employ the Keras models for the validation of the CNN instead of k-fold cross-validation strategy. Also, we propose to automatically classify the ECG signals using CNN without performing any noise filtering in our future work.   . 